# Ezaa people

Ezaa or Ezza  is a northeastern Igbo group, in Ebonyi State, southeastern Nigeria. The Ezaa are direct descendants of Anakiwha predecessors .  the share same progenitors  with other Umuekumenyi which comprises Nnoyo,  Nnodo and Ezekuna respectively. Ezekuna is the father of the Ezza culture . The Ezzas refers themselves as Ezaa Ezekuna .  “. The group is found in Ebonyi Central and  also have many significant populations in the North and south  LGA's across the Ebonyi state 


== Origin of Ezza people ==
Ezza people traces origin to a group of Neolithic autochthonous Igbo group who lived around the Northestearn Igboland called the Anakiwha .  The Formation of modern Ezza culture revolves around a figure called  Enyi.   based on  the migratory story,  the  partriarch called EKuma Enyi is  said have to flee  his Egu settlement and move northward after a conquest (possibly Ugwuegu story of afikpo ) and sought refuge among the his ancestral kins the Anakiwha in Onueke area. Enyi as  adopted to Anakiwha leke  rose  to be  among the council of Anakiwha Ezeke (Anakiwha leke) the last ancient custodian of the Anakiwha council who died of an mythical ailments. Enyi married amongst the family of Anakiwha Ezeke begot two sons Nnoyo and Nnodo who later founded the Izzi and Ikwo . Ezekuna (Ezeke Una) is the direct linage of Anakiwha leke and was a stepbrother to Ekumaenyi . Ezekuna married Anyigor, sister to Nnoyo and Nnodo the sons of Enyi nwegu which automatically made him brother in-law and step uncle them .


== Geography ==
Ezza people lives homogeneously in 22 autonomous communities and shares several communities with other groups 
Ezza community are classified into groups below.
1. Izo-imoha group : This communities lives in northern Ezza heartland especially in Ezza north LGA;
Umuezeoka,
Umuezekeoha,
Umuoghara,
Oriuzo and  
Ekka with integration of Ogboji , umuhuali and Amaewula.
2.Izzikworo group : This communities are in Ezza southeast development axis ;
Amegu Headquarters, 
Amana,
Amaezekwe,
Idembia , 
Echara,
Okoffia,
3.Kpakpaji group: This communities host the urban of Onueke and it's the centre of Ezza administration;
Amekka, 
Amuzu, 
Ezzama.
4. Ukawu group : this  are isolated communities in southernmost part of Ezza formed out of prior sojourning of other groups from the heartland due dispersal and as refuge of war and exile's; 
Abba-omegge, 
Okuzzu,
Ishinkwo,
Amankpuma,
5. The Proto-Ezza  unclassified communities are 
Nsokkara and 
Amudo
6. Satellites communities gotten out of war and mercenarial service includes;
Izzo,
Ezzagu ,
Ezza akpoga,
Izzo ,
Ezza Benue (ojiegbe ,Otsukputu, Ulayi),
Ezza-Ezzilo , 
and many other settlements


== Notable people ==
Offia Nwali
Paulinus Igwe Nwagu
Eze Kenneth Emeka
Lazarus Ogbee
Benard Odoh
Julius Ucha


== References ==