THE HISTORY, MIGRATION & SETTLEMENT OF THE AKASHIADA CLANS IN UKWUANI LAND
THE UMUEBU KINGDOM JOURNAL
Subscribe Sign in
THE HISTORY, MIGRATION & SETTLEMENT OF THE AKASHIADA CLANS IN UKWUANI LAND
This article is culled and written by Justin Okpu,
Justin Okpu, The Host.
Sep 02, 2023
1
Share
THE HISTORY, MIGRATION & SETTLEMENT OF THE AKASHIADA CLANS IN UKWUANI LAND
Subscribe
The Akashiada clans originally consists of Eziokpor, Ezionum and Umuebu indigenous people. In the course of time, Obiaruku by extension as farm settlement annexed to Umuebu, began to grow with multiple of indigenous Umuebu people as first settlers, thereafter other pockets of sojourners arrived from other neighbouring villages and nearby clans, to populate the farm settlement.
Initially, the farm settlements which situates around the banks of the Ethiope river, is endowed with natural resource ranging from very arable land for farming accompanied by lush - green vegetation.
Along the banks of the river, lay the huge dominant forest trees which stretched along the flowing Ethiope river sourcing from Umuaja, one of the clans forming part of the Ukwuani groups of clans.
These natural resources attracted several sojourners from far away and wide, thus Obiaruku rapidly became prominent due to early commercial and administrative activities conducted by British colonial administrators and subsequently, creation of administrative provinces around Obiaruku and some part of the Niger Delta Region.
Share
During the early formation of Obiaruku, the British Royal Niger Company was very active in the export of timbers, including processed raw rubber liquid tapped from the rubber trees (also botanically known as Hevea Brasiliensis, the Pará rubber trees) plantation situated around the Ethiope river banks.
Consequently, Obiaruku grew from a mere farm settlement into the largest town in Ukwuani land, mitigating it's establishment as the headquarters of Ukwuani Local Government Area when it was created.
It is recorded that these clans have common historical background traceable to earliest Akashiada customs, that their ancestral forebears transcended down to them and found in the current practices of the Ukwuani people during inter - tribal interactions.
The traditional history of the Akashiada clans and it's origin, às recorded by Okolugbo's account that Akashiada ancestors and their subjects arrived in the area in a wave of migration from Benin during the fifteenth century, according to Okolugbo's claim, their forebear ancestors founded the Akashiada group of villages as have been migrated into the their current location .
However, another school of thought containing better verifiable account, considers the given current circumstance that Akashiada clans adopt Igbo names, as well as engaging similar cultural, traditional practices, makes it explicitly doubtful that Akashiada clans migrated from Benin as claimed by Okolugbo.
Share THE UMUEBU KINGDOM JOURNAL
The consideration of an expository lead could be deciphered from a recent tradition collated by indigenous Umuebu researchers.
In accordance with this second school of thought, the Akashiada clans and their subjects migrated to their current location from Eastern Nigeria, in a multiple wave of sojourns and settled firstly at Umuoshi quarters located in Eziokpor (Enunwokwu).
It suggests that the earlier traditional practice tracing the origin of Akashiada to the heavens, was only intended to mystify their collective ancestry beliefs, ascribing some sort of divinity to it's tradition and attracting more faithfful devotion to the Akashiada traditional practices from other neighbouring clans.
Subsequently, in further migrations made by offsprings from Eziokpor, Ezionum and Umuebu, is as a result of multiple settlements created in other villages traceable to the historical Akashiada clans migration.
Donate Subscriptions
The earliest Obiaruku settlements is believed to have been founded by an Umuebu man known as, Mokka.
Early account of Obiaruku migration history expressed principally, as an individual purpose - driven objective by the Mokka's migration from Umuebu, to serve as early warning defensive strategy against external incursion on Umuebu clan, and subsequently as well as serving as farm settlement on the bank of the prime Ethiope river blessed with abundant natural resources found around it.
Mokka is said to have left with his subjects from their home land in Umuebu and settled at the current Obiaruku location in about 1880 (as recorded by Miller).
According to the traditional history, Mokka was later joined by the whole of the Okoso quarters who settled beside Mokka’s settlement. However, the traditional history tracing the founding of Obiaruku to Mokka has been contested by the divergent school of thought.
Another traditional history account, recorded by Ohadike says the first immigrants to Obiaruku were inhabitants of Awkuzu quarters. According to this account, the Awkuzu people of Obiaruku claim that their ancestors had left Awkuzu, in Eastern Igboland, to settle in Aboh and later moved on to take up residence at Umuebu.
At Umuebu, they felt humiliated and betrayed by the indigenous Umuebu people, decided to move into an uninhabited area at the eastern belt of the river. It is assumed the Awkuzu settlers became more comfortable in their current location, with better and larger land area than where they moved from in Umuebu.
They were laler joined by relatives left earlier behind at Aboh, better known as the Ogwezi immigrants, who settled along the same stretch of Ethiope river banks, between Obiaruku and Awkuzu and consequently founded the Umundede quarter in Obiaruku.
This was followed by yet another unverifiable account, suggest that certain quarter of the Umuebu people claim to have their anceors migrated from Ebu (a Western Igbo community in the Asaba area), while the ancestors of those of Ezionum came from Asaba, Utchi and Afor.
For purpose a very viable, conclusive, realistic and narrative documentation, the traditional beliefs, historical origins of the Akashiada clans suggest, that the people are the most recent migrants to the Ukwuani land.
Contrary to Okolugbo’s suggestion that Akashiada migration into the Ukwuani area took place around the fifteenth century, it probably occurred between the late sixteenth (16th) century and the early seventeenth (17th) century, the final migration to their current location may have taken place in the closing decades of the seventeenth (17th) century, shortly afterwards, Obiaruku migration which occured in the closing decade of nineteenth (19th) century
Curiously, the verifiable narrations of the Akashiada traditional historical origin, buttresses the fact that almost all
the notable migration history account here on the Akashiada clans origin claims, pointed towards the already existing western Igbo communities such as Asaba, Ebu, Utchi and Afor, as their primary point of migration trigger.
FOOTNOTES:
This Article culled from content written by scholars and researchers on Ukwuani People's History & Origin appendix here below:.
i) Are the Ukwuanis Benin or Igbo?
A Study of Origin and Migration
Written By Paul O. Opone.
Department of History &
International Studies
Delta State University,
Abraka.
ii) The History of Ukwuani and Ndoshimili People of the Niger Delta. Benin City:
A publication ofEthiope Publishing
Corporation, 2004 .
Written By Emmanual Okolugbo.
Leave a comment
Read THE UMUEBU KINGDOM JOURNAL in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android
Get the app
1
Share
Previous Next
Discussion about this post
Comments Restacks
Top Latest
No posts
Ready for more?
Subscribe
© 2026 The Umuebu Kingdom Journal · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Start your Substack Get the app
Substack is the home for great culture
This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts
