Ekpeye dictionary: circulation version
1. Introduction
The Ekpeye language is spoken between the Orashi and Sambreiro rivers in Ahoada West LGA in Rivers
State and Yenagoa LGA, Bayelsa State, Nigeria. Ekpeye (under the name Ekpaffia) is first mentioned in
Forde & Jones (1950:49-51) who estimated there were 6800 adult males in the 1930s. Ekpeye has four
recognised dialects, Ako, Ubye, Upata and Igbuduya. The immediate neighbours of the Ekpeye are the
Ogba (Igboid), the Egene (Edoid) and Abua and Obogolo (Central Delta) and speakers are in contact
with many Ijoid languages, the predominant speech community of the Niger Delta. A literacy programme
was established among the Ekpeye and readers and teaching materials prepared as well as a guide to
Ekpeye personal names (Ikpe 1972). Little has been published on Ekpeye culture, but Picton (1988) is a
description of the masquerades and Briggs (2002) describes attitudes to female circumcision. Clark
(2006) has published an informal account of living in Ekpeye. The present document is a wordlist of
Ekpeye, based mainly on electronic mss. left by Kay Williamson, who regrettably died on January 3rd,
2005. The only substantial work on the Ekpeye language is the unpublished thesis of David Clark (Clark
1969), a reading and writing book (Clark 1971a) and some articles (Clark 1971b,c; 1972; 1974). Clark's
thesis is highly formal and is based entirely on folktale and other texts recorded in the mid-1960s.
David Clark' prepared a list of Ekpeye nouns and verbs in association with his thesis which has
circulated in photocopy form but never properly edited. This list is not entirely consistent with the
orthography used in his thesis and some of the problems will be explained below. Some time ago, Kay
Williamson had Clark's mss. typed into the computer in an old Macintosh format, using keystroke
sequences to represent vowels plus diacritics. She then appears to have gone through the mss. with a Mr.
Odieke-Akoh?, putting in revised tonal transcriptions. For some reason, there were several versions of the
same word in the computer file. There were also a few hand-written extra words on the mss. not in the
electronic version. Further words relating mainly to Ekpeye dance and music terms were supplied by the
present editor. Different orthographic conventions were used in the same file, so the implosives were
sometimes represented as '' and '6', sometimes as 'dh' and 'bh'. Clark's manuscript mostly represents
downstep as an apostrophe in a sequence of tone letters. Thus HH'H is High, High, Downstep, High.
However, occasionally he uses macrons over the letters, such as in bositolo, for reasons that are not clear.
This may be a fossil from the orthographic representation of tone, which does use a macron. Ikpe (1972),
which is fully tone-marked, uses a macron for downstep throughout. This was retained in the electronic
file and is allowed to remain here, pending further information on the meaning of this convention.
The only other major source on Ekpeye are the entries in Kay Williamson and Chinyere Ohiri-Aniche's
"Comparative Igboid', a massive electronic manuscript still in preparation. These are entered in an IPA-
like, but this was not cross-checked against the other files. As a consequence there are occasional marked
INconsistencies between the two records of Ekpeye. which cannot be reconciled without checking against
further field data.
Considerable re-organisation was required to make the data usable. The following processes were
undertaken;
1 David Clark contacted with me in June 2010 with some corrections and additional bibliography. He notes that
there is a sti unpublished ms ot tolk-tale texts. have vet to work through al corrections. but this 1s in
progress.
2 I regret to say I have no further information about Mr. Odieke-Akoh, though I am trying to establish his identity.
